==+== Computer Architecture Paper Review Form
==-== DO NOT CHANGE LINES THAT START WITH "==+==" UNLESS DIRECTED!
==-== For further guidance, or to upload this file when you are done, go to:
==-== https://safari.ethz.ch/review/architecture21/offline

==+== =====================================================================
==+== Begin Review
==+== Reviewer: Guillaume Thivolet <gthivolet@student.ethz.ch>

==+== Paper Number

13

==+== Review Readiness
==-== Enter "Ready" if the review is ready for others to see:

Ready

==+== A. Overall merit
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. Reject
==-==    2. Weak reject
==-==    3. Weak accept
==-==    4. Accept
==-==    5. Strong accept
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

5

==+== B. Reviewer expertise
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. No familiarity
==-==    2. Some familiarity
==-==    3. Knowledgeable
==-==    4. Expert
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

2

==+== C. Paper summary

Ambit proposes augmented DRAM functionalities with access to new bulk-bitwise operations in 3 rows at a time inside a DRAM (NOT, OR, AND operation). Ambit is compatible with existing DRAM commands and address interface. Its solution is low-cost and entails only a 1% overhead in the existing technologies.

It does so by modifying slightly DRAM cells and the sense amplifier. Ambit AND-OR uses Triple row-activations (TRA) which connect a sense amplifier with three DRAM cells on the same bitline, while Ambit-NOT relies on the introduced Dual-contact cell (DCC). The DCC has two transistors wired on the sense-amplifier bitline and ~bitline, allowing for an efficient negation of the data by the Ambit controller.

Ambit divides the addresses array in the DRAM in three categories (Bitwise, Control and Data). In its current implementation, each sub-array contains 2 C-group, 8 B-group addresses while the D ones retain data.

Those reserved addresses are required to perform the AMBIT-operations with the TRA and DCC cells logic. The row decoder is split into two to simultaneously decode B-group and C/D-group addresses, to speedup the execution of the new Activate-Activate-Precharge primitive sequence.

Extensive hardware cost evaluation has been performed to push its industrial use.

The performance improvement of Ambit is best when compared to the targeted cloud applications (database bitmap indices,BitWeaving and bit-vector based sets). Compared to state-of-the-art baselines, the speedup factor in average is 32x for seven bulk bitwise operations while reducing the power consumption by 35x.

==+== D. Comments for author

Ambit is a cutting edge-research paper, written concisely, disclosing ways to improve the current DRAM technology. The challenges are only targeting bulk-bitwise operations.
There is a lack of vectors of improvements in the conclusion at the end. Also, it seems that there is still a huge effort to be made by the industry to push Ambit onto the market, and the simulations of the TRA cells show that there could be yield loss due to the manufacturing process variations, and adding that to the sub-array overhead could push-back the adoption.
Nevertheless it is clear that the energy efficiency and the speedup are non-negligeable for its targeted applications.

# Strength

- Triple row activation with a single address (preselected address)
- Applications can trigger Ambit operations using CPU instructions rather that going through a device API (pluggable on PCIe!)
- Smart Ambit software integration that shadows the B/C rows from the programmer standpoint (easier integration).

# Weaknesses

- Overhead of copying the 2 source rows into the AMBIT capable rows
- Ambit-AND-OR sensible to process variation (affects DRAM yields)

==+== E. Comments for PC
==-== Hidden from authors.

==+== Scratchpad (for unsaved private notes)

no change to the DRAm command and address interfae (no need to go through the GPU and we can make use of the processors intructions)

Reusability across all DRAM vendors due to the same DRAM microarchitectures

Applications mostly for data-centers (we search, genome analysis..)

Baseline of comparision uses SIMD optimizations

TRA -> triple row activations


-- Assume that all the cells have the same capciatance which would not be true in a real design


--- Overhead f copying the 2 source rows into the AMBIT capable rows

introduction of a new primitive operation called AAP
addition of a new row decoder for simulataneous row activations

Row decorder must distinguish between B-group addr adn the remaining ones

B-group, C-group, D-group
C group is controlgroup, with two preinit rows (1111s or 0000s) for controlling the bitwise operation (AND/OR)
D-group rows that store regular data, AMBIT software exposes them only
Ambit controller interleaves the row addresses so all D-group addr are mappped ontiguously to the proc. phys addr space

--- Bulk bitwise operation involves multiple copy operations (can be reduced by compilation techniques)


+++ applications can trigger Ambit operations using CPU instructions rahter that going through a device API (pluggable on PCIe)



Ambit-AND-OR sensible to process variation (affects DRAM yields)

Evaluation with bitweaving (column scan opearations), up to 11.8x speedup
==+== End Review
