==+== Computer Architecture Paper Review Form
==-== DO NOT CHANGE LINES THAT START WITH "==+==" UNLESS DIRECTED!
==-== For further guidance, or to upload this file when you are done, go to:
==-== https://safari.ethz.ch/review/architecture21/offline

==+== =====================================================================
==+== Begin Review
==+== Reviewer: Guillaume Thivolet <gthivolet@student.ethz.ch>

==+== Paper Number

27

==+== Review Readiness
==-== Enter "Ready" if the review is ready for others to see:

()

==+== A. Overall merit
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. Reject
==-==    2. Weak reject
==-==    3. Weak accept
==-==    4. Accept
==-==    5. Strong accept
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

5

==+== B. Reviewer expertise
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. No familiarity
==-==    2. Some familiarity
==-==    3. Knowledgeable
==-==    4. Expert
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

2

==+== C. Paper summary

MinION, released in 2014, is the first commercially available nanopore-based DNA/RNA sequencing portable device.
The bottleneck for shifting from a cloud computing to an on-board processing has been identified to be the basecalling process which takes up to 96% of the compute time.

This novel alternative to more expensive methods could allow for faster and on-site identifications of future viruses without any requirement of custom primers.

The SquiggleFilter hardware accelerator, based on a Read Until pipeline and Dynamic Time Wrapping (DTW) permits to perform long reads, at a low cost, in real-time using the MinION device.
They implemented several improvements to subsequence DTW (multi-staging, hardware-friendly operations..) which turns out to be suitable for viruses which contain less than 50 000 bases.

The result is a less powering consuming unit (/2), with lower latency (3481x) and greater throughput (x274) relative to existing GPU-solutions.
 
==+== D. Comments for author

# STRENGTHS

- Showed that sDTW shouldn't be eschewed for virus detection
- Huge throughput, latency and power saving improvements
- Power gateable tiles that are independent from one each other
- Accessible and reproducible work

# WEAKNESSES

- There was no comparison with custom hardware accelerated basecalling
- Cost estimation for the custom ASIC needs to be taken into factor when calculating device cost if you include your solution in the comparison

The paper is well written and easy to follow along.
The introduction gave a clear understanding of the challenges and methods currently used, which was required to understand the extent of the work achieved in the paper.

I especially enjoy when more general-devices are reduced to targeted/specific uses cases and it shows that methods that have previously been discarded (sDTW) can prove effective when used appropriately. The bespoke trimmed down algorithm is elegant.

The opening on scalability is appreciated and shows that SF throughput will not be the limiting factor in the future.
However, it would have been appreciated if you would explicitly state what's left to be achieved starting from there because it feels that the paper lacks of an opening.

Some additional comments:
- Figure 16 is great but could be improved because it misleads slightly the reader on what metric should be looked at
- How many tiles could we fit in the design?


==+== E. Comments for PC

This is first-class work that leverages an existing device and accelerates its throughput even more. It deserves recognition and should be accepted.
==-== Hidden from authors.

==+== Scratchpad (for unsaved private notes)

PCR Primers are targeted to a specific virus, and esigning primers is time consuming, error-prone and complex process.
Low cost, portable, and can sequence long reads in real time using Universal PCR that amplifies asll DNA/RNA

Read until, as reads are sequenced, they need to be analyzed in real time

As soon as the computer classifies non viral read,it ejects uit and proceeds to nthe next one

The Deep NeuralN takes 96% of the compute time Large fraction goes to basecalling (96%)

Skip the basecaller by directly comparing each read's squiggles to the precomputed expected signal profuile of the target  entire reference genome

Can sequence in ~2R cycles (R number of bases)

Universal rapid test to determine the whole genome of a target virtus using reference guided assembly

MinION is a portable device able to perform long reads, at a low-cost, in real time 10 samples epr base
The critical computin path for Read Until includes both the basecaller and aligner

Explanation of guppy could have proved useful

SquiggleFilter 
SF diirectly aligns electrical signals read against target viral genome's reference

6-mer / current LUT which provides expected current for every possible combination

--- Not a feasible solution for human genomes (3 billion base pairs)

Multi stage sDTW Filtering -> Non target reqds filtered eand ejected using Read Until would be short
+ absolute difference instead of multiplidation
integer normalizatin ( )

Detect strains 

Measurements -> alignement -> normalization

+++ POwer gating of independent SF tiles
+++ POpening on scalabnility (nanopore chemistr qwith x10-1000 throughput)
==+== End Review