==+== Computer Architecture Paper Review Form
==-== DO NOT CHANGE LINES THAT START WITH "==+==" UNLESS DIRECTED!
==-== For further guidance, or to upload this file when you are done, go to:
==-== https://safari.ethz.ch/review/architecture21/offline

==+== =====================================================================
==+== Begin Review
==+== Reviewer: Guillaume Thivolet <gthivolet@student.ethz.ch>

==+== Paper Number

3

==+== Review Readiness
==-== Enter "Ready" if the review is ready for others to see:


==+== A. Overall merit
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. Reject
==-==    2. Weak reject
==-==    3. Weak accept
==-==    4. Accept
==-==    5. Strong accept
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

3

==+== B. Reviewer expertise
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. No familiarity
==-==    2. Some familiarity
==-==    3. Knowledgeable
==-==    4. Expert
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

2

==+== C. Paper summary

This is a summary writing from Prof. Mutlu about main memory. It gives a wide understanding of the current bottlenecks in terms of DRAM scalability as well as insights into actual research.

The challenges presented orbit around 3 axis:

- new DRAM architectures
- incorporating emerging memory technologies
- predictable performances

Indeed, the growing DRAM density in the sub-30nm technologies brings to the forefront issues in the memory systems such as energy consumption, latency, Quality of Service (effective bandwidth) which are not improving and question the future DRAM usage. Today's trend of ever-increasing the number of processors require the emergence of new technologies to better share memory across cores, and overcome the DRAM limitations.

Efforts have been made to tackle the shortcomings of the DRAM. For instance, Sub-array level parallelism increases bandwidth by allowing to issue two requests to a same bank with less latency. TL-DRAM reduces latency and increases efficiency by dividing into multiple segments the long bitlines. To gain bandwidth and minimize DRAM utilization, Row-Clone exports bulk data operations such as copy or initialization inside the DRAM.

Secondly, the arrival of new technologies questions the two-levels organization in the memory management of persistent and volatile memories. Mainly, Phase-change memory, Resistive-RAM, STT-RAM, each having their specific trade-offs. It is not possible yet to replace all DRAMs with those as they don't accommodate all the needs of DRAMs.

A solution could be hybrid main memories formed by either multiple technologies. The software could take advantage of the different latencies, retention time and power consumptions offered by each technology. Moreover, backward compatibility should be achieved to enhance existing memories.

Finally, the performance challenge is to provide the appropriate bandwidth to each core in heterogeneous systems. The request service rate must be non-interfered to achieve the highest performances possible.

More than ever, the hardware and system co-design is of importance to fully overcome the scaling limits and better coordinate the processors resources.

==+== D. Comments for author

This chapter mentions the challenges in the main memory scaling. It would have been useful to keep track and mention the trade-offs between the solutions presented, ie. which ones are not applicable simultaneously. Metrics and figures were precise and guide well the reader on the points being made.

The DRAM current issues are dissected into several bullet points followed by the introduction of the new technologies. Each section mentions a technological solution to a specific problem, but it would have been interesting to tell more from the application standpoint which for instance has been done for the bulk operations with RowClone.

Lastly, there is a focus on the memory technology but less on the peripheral circuitry changes that need to be achieved as well.


# Strength

- Challenges are clearly exposed, current and future solutions directions as well
- Diversity of exploration vectors
- Aside on flash memory

# Weaknesses

- Underestimation of the efforts required to achieve aforementioned solutions
- Little to no mention of processing in memory
- Which public does it target?

==+== E. Comments for PC
==-== Hidden from authors.



==+== Scratchpad (for unsaved private notes)

DRAM tehcnology scaling issues

shared memory across processing cores
need for an efficient data manipulation
new technologies such as PCM, RRAm, STTMRAM are more scalable
trend of more cores with less memroy capacit, needing for more memory, higher bandiwth

technology scalability (need for finding a technology that is more scalable than DRAM (energy, capacity, cost)

be able to achieve sub 30nm RAMM

need for perfomance predictability and WoS in the shared main memroy sustem

third, need for a much higher energy/power/bandwith


NEW DRAM ARCHITECTURES
1) overcome the problem of refreshment (loss of Qos...),
2) improve reiliability
3) energy efficiency
4) minimize data movement
5) need for a finer garanularity

future DRAM 64gb have 46% refresh rates
approach like RAIDR that puts rows into bins with diff. refresh rates

increase cooperation between DRAM device and DRAM controller to get information about weak cells
easier error management thourgh the DRAM Translation Layer


DRAM PARALLELISM
SALP (sub-array level parallelism to issue two requests to te same bank at the same time) -> introduction of a global decoder


ERNEGY

Solution such as Tl-DRAM with isolation transistors to divide long bitlines into multiple segments to reduce latency and raise efficiency

DVFS can enable dynamic heterogeneity

EXPORTING BULK DATA OPERATIONS TO DRMA
bulk data copy and initialization operations

Row-Clone in-DRAM copy to minimize software impact on DRAM utilization

first class accelerator in a heterogeneous parallel computing system


MINIMIZING CAPACITY AND MEM BandWidth WASTE

low latency data and memory compression (ie. base-delta-immediate compresion) 

better last-level cache writeback (coordinated techniques between the processor ressoures and memory controller)

Challenge 2: EMERGING MEM TECHNOLOGIES

PCM: store multiple bits per cell, non volatile (no refresh!! so low idle power consumption)

cost is much higher latency, energy

reorganizatio of the peripheral circuitry is needed (same for STT-MRAM)

narrow row buffer canr educe main memory dnamic energies


HYBRID MAIN MEMORIES

multiple mem tech merged into 1 (3d-stacked, embedded dram, PCM, STT_MRAM)

software can leverage different rows addr accesses to forward them to either PCM or DRAM part

NVMainMemory
byte-adressable NVM at the downside of security concers: an attacker could leak data after the power is down. (important challenge)


MERGING OF MEM AND STORAGE

reorgnaization of the two levels memroy managemet as seen to merge volatile and persistant memroeis 
todayNVM technology promise persitant data, could make the OS the new bottleneck

ie. Persistent memory mnager (PMM) -> hardware/software cooperation virtual memory system

data mapping

backward compatibility to enhance existing memory

Challenge 3 PREDICTABLE PERFORMANCES
provide appropriate bandwith to each core
able to predict application prefomance in the presence of interference 
(perfomance is a low uninterfered request service rate)

correct rentention errors using Flash Correct and Refresh to increase flash lifitme and diminishus the flash bit error rate

Neighbor-Cell Assisted Correction

==+== End Review

