==+== Computer Architecture Paper Review Form
==-== DO NOT CHANGE LINES THAT START WITH "==+==" UNLESS DIRECTED!
==-== For further guidance, or to upload this file when you are done, go to:
==-== https://safari.ethz.ch/review/architecture21/offline

==+== =====================================================================
==+== Begin Review
==+== Reviewer: Guillaume Thivolet <gthivolet@student.ethz.ch>

==+== Paper Number

36

==+== Review Readiness
==-== Enter "Ready" if the review is ready for others to see:

()

==+== A. Overall merit
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. Reject
==-==    2. Weak reject
==-==    3. Weak accept
==-==    4. Accept
==-==    5. Strong accept
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

5

==+== B. Reviewer expertise
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. No familiarity
==-==    2. Some familiarity
==-==    3. Knowledgeable
==-==    4. Expert
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

2

==+== C. Paper summary

True random number generation is a necessity in a variety of domains, ranging from security applications, scientific simulation and even entertainment. It is commonly hard to achieve because either it is not fully non deterministic (ie. Pseudo-RNG), have low throughput or depends on a physical process that is not measurable on any device class.

D-RaNGe is a novel class of TRNG which uses DRAM as a medium, widely available on any commodity hardware nowadays (microcontrollers, PC...). It enables a high-throughput (up to 700MB/s), high entropy, energy efficient and stable (non-environmment dependent) source of random number generation at a low-cost.

Certain DRAM cells are vulnerable to activation failures and that is used at DRNG's advantage when those specific cells are being accessed with a lower t_rcd than the specification requires. This prevents the bitlines from being charged back to their VDD/2 voltages, which generates failure and thus randomness.

DRNG work is tiered in two phases. An algorithm finds a subset of cells that are prone to failure, and then a cherry-picks from this set those that fail with high entropy. The second part consist of the serving the requests of random numbers from the host device. DRNG pre-computes random numbers (RN) when the device utilization is low and bandwidth is available, and is able as well to generate RN on-demand while servicing applications workloads with a fast response (max 1us). It requires no hardware redesign as it essentially consists in a firmware routine executed on the memory controller side.

Activation failure characterization showed that from more than 282 devices (either LPDDR3 or LPDDR4) from different manufacturer, under different conditions (temperature, repetitions), the data pattern repeatedly identifies the same failing cells. The entropy is determined (non-voluntarily) at manufacturing time but failing cells are present across any vendors in every DRAM.

The evaluation validates the true randomness with the use of a statistical NIST test suite. Previous work has been using on startup value, data retention time or non deterministic command scheduling but those are respectively unrealistic, too slow and not truly random.

==+== D. Comments for author

A few comments from my reading, for an otherwise clear paper:

- Figure 6 is hard to comprehend, plotting results with T+10, T+15 would allow the reader to easily see the difference
- Paragraph 5.2 could be clarified. lots of algorithms name are thrown in, making it hard to follow
- 5.2 again, does that mean that you need to know in advance which manufacturer it is to select the algorithm? or does it just lead to slightly worse result  

# Strength

- Implementable on any DRAM device
- True randomness and high throughput linearly proportional to nb of banks used
- Works under many conditions (not temperature dependent, t_rcd has a wide working range)

# Weaknesses

- 15 concurrent days of testing only! this might not be enough
- Section 3 and introduction are highly repetitive

==+== E. Comments for PC
==-== Hidden from authors.

==+== Scratchpad (for unsaved private notes)

decrease DRAM row activation latency [t_rcd] to induce read errors (true rng) validated by statistial test NIST

review 284 DDR3 RAM

2order of magnitude higher througput than previous DRAM-basd TRNG (700 MB/s)
Pseud-random number generator (from a seed)

1. implementable on commoditiy dRAM dvices today
2. fully non deterministic
3. provides continuous high thoruphut
4. doesnt affect running applications

OBSERVATIONS
certain cells are vunerable to activaio failures
-> identiy them using a low latency profiling step

15 day of testin, w/ != range of temp 

TRNG
1) entopy source
2) randomness extraction technique
3) post-processor to improve randomness of extracted data at the expense of throughput (REMOVES CORRELATION)

Section 3 is highly repetitive

5. Acivation Failure Characterization
spatial distribuion of activation fialures
data pattern dependence on DRAM cells
temperature variation

SPATIAL
failure prob. of a cell attached to a btline correlates with the distance between the row and the local sense amplifier
1) regon AND bitline of DRAM being accessaffect the number of observable action failures

DATA PATTERN TO IDENTIFY CELLS PRONE TO FAILURE
different data patterns result in diffeent failureproabilities
temperature affects F_prob to different degrees, but generally incraeasing T incresae the F_prob

entropy is deterinisic at manufactuing time long term aging effect are not studie

DRNG
1) finding a subet of cells that fail with 50% prob and then the subset that fail with high entroy

1000 reading with reduced t_rcd
approximate each cell's Shannon entropy by countin the occurence of 3-bit symbols across its 1000 bit strea. RNG cells are the ones that have an equal number of 3-bit symbols

--- only 15 days of aging tested....

DRAM access can induce activation failures only in the acceessed DRAM word -> the denstiy of RNG cells per DRAM word determines the number of random bits D-RaNGE can generate per access

READ requests NEED to follow an ACTIVATION (need row conflicts
)

queue of already harvested random data may be maintened in the memroy contoller for use, and harvest data only when DRAM is not harvesting other requests

EVALUATION
passess all NIST tests -> fully nondeterministic

RNG cells are widely avaialable across all manufactured DRAMS across ALL manufactures in all banks
wide range of t_rcd possible (6-13ns compared to 18 default)

++++ throughput is linearly proportional to the number of banks used
latency is DRAM access latency 

low storage overhead (0.18%)

PREVIOUS WORK 
non deterministic command scheldling but NOT fully non determinististic entropy source)

DRAM data retention -> too slow! 0.05 MB/s
DRM startup values
==+== End Review
