==+== Computer Architecture Paper Review Form
==-== DO NOT CHANGE LINES THAT START WITH "==+==" UNLESS DIRECTED!
==-== For further guidance, or to upload this file when you are done, go to:
==-== https://safari.ethz.ch/review/architecture21/offline

==+== =====================================================================
==+== Begin Review
==+== Reviewer: Guillaume Thivolet <gthivolet@student.ethz.ch>

==+== Paper Number

63

==+== Review Readiness
==-== Enter "Ready" if the review is ready for others to see:

()

==+== A. Overall merit
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. Reject
==-==    2. Weak reject
==-==    3. Weak accept
==-==    4. Accept
==-==    5. Strong accept
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

2

==+== B. Reviewer expertise
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. No familiarity
==-==    2. Some familiarity
==-==    3. Knowledgeable
==-==    4. Expert
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

2

==+== C. Paper summary

(Written in 1979)

This brief note from Prof. Amdahl illustrates the necessity to give more thought on whether or not multi-core processing has benefits compared to the traditional single processor approach.
He states that not every program can benefit of the multi-processors, one memory, as the instruction stream will stall due to memory congestion.
He shows that although there's use for this new method, due to overheads in sharing, wait time for serial instruction cannot be ignored, and there is an inevitable slow down.

The conclusion is that the gain is not only dependent on the number of processors, but rather to the percentage of the program that can be parallelized.
It can be seen that adding N processors does not scale the throughput by a factor N, as opposed to having N processors executing the same program on different machines. 

==+== D. Comments for author

It's a fair point that tradeoffs are to be expected when talking about multicore processing and the workload is hard to balance equitably across the computing units.

What to consider when developing program for multicore processors? Where should be the focus: in the hardware to handle multiple memory requests to keep a certain level of fairness, or to have instructions that better structure the programs to make use of that new efficiency.

In conclusion, it lacks of inputs for vectors of improvements to the new approach and there is a feeling that we are only itching the surface.

# Strength

- Examples are precise and illustrate correctly the bottleneck

# Weaknesses

- (graph hardly readable)
- "Blanket statement" in the conclusion without proposals for future work

==+== E. Comments for PC
==-== Hidden from authors.

==+== Scratchpad (for unsaved private notes)

written sept 1979

Validity of single-core processors VS multi-core processors

Argues about the need of achievements in quential processing raets 

"If it were easy they wouldn't have been left as bottlenecks"

==+== End Review
