==+== Computer Architecture Paper Review Form
==-== DO NOT CHANGE LINES THAT START WITH "==+==" UNLESS DIRECTED!
==-== For further guidance, or to upload this file when you are done, go to:
==-== https://safari.ethz.ch/review/architecture21/offline

==+== =====================================================================
==+== Begin Review
==+== Reviewer: Guillaume Thivolet <gthivolet@student.ethz.ch>

==+== Paper Number

66

==+== Review Readiness
==-== Enter "Ready" if the review is ready for others to see:

()

==+== A. Overall merit
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. Reject
==-==    2. Weak reject
==-==    3. Weak accept
==-==    4. Accept
==-==    5. Strong accept
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

5

==+== B. Reviewer expertise
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. No familiarity
==-==    2. Some familiarity
==-==    3. Knowledgeable
==-==    4. Expert
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

2

==+== C. Paper summary

Published in 2014, Rowhammer is a widespread disturbance in all DRAM that breaks memory isolation and allows an attacker to induce bit-flips in victim rows by accessing adjacent rows frequently in a limited time period (known as hammering).

As the DRAM cells continue to scale down, Rowhammer worsens and the vulnerability increases as the cells get closer. Several level of mitigation have been planned out, (1) increase the refresh rate, (2) isolate the rows with physical addressing, (3) refresh rows and lastly (4) a proactive throttling of the memory requests.

Ideally they require no modification the the DRAM chip design, no impact on performances or energy consumption, a reliable security by fully mitigating the attacks, as well as not throttling benign applications. Preventing Rowhammer is difficult as existing solutions all show that trade-offs need to be made in the previously mentioned metrics.

Blockhammer is a defense mechanism implemented on the memory controller that uses low area (<1%), saves energy (34%) and is better performing than state-of-the-art mitigation. It relies on two mechanisms:
- A rowblocker that prevents accessing row after a certain activation thresold in a time window
- AttackThrottler, which tracks <thread, DRAM bank> pairs to detect threads that are rowhammering to slow them down  

It is a promising defense mechanism that was proof-tested on many sided activations, scalability and benchmarked against all state-of-the-art solutions.

==+== D. Comments for author

The paper is rather dense but of impeccable quality. Blockerhammer seems to be an effective prevention of Rowhammer. The paper presents two main tools to achieve at its results, but the focus is really Rowblocker. Attackthrottler (AT) is an additionnal defense mechanism, that helps out the former. AT could be highlighted in the conclusion for future-work direction.

AT also doesn't find patterns where different threads interlap their rows accesses. So in this case AT would have limited to no impact.

Blockhammer is elegant as is doesnt not induce row refreshes, saves energy and doesn't require to modify the digital design nor entails a large area.

The latency of Rowblocker was also computed and it shows that is two order of magnitude smaller than the row access latency, which further validates usability of Blockhammer

For the many sided pattern, it is not clear from a first reading that Nrh* becomes the new Nrh for every pattern.

As for the scalability, I was trying to find the reason why the area increased when Nrh decreased. This because the CBF storage must increase to prevent faults and rows bits overlapping. This makes the evaluation results a bit harder to understand for a first read, perhaps this could be mentioned again in the paragraph below Table 4.

# Strength

- better results than state-of-the-art-defenses and scalable
- area efficient, no dram redesign, no performance degradation
- effective against many side rowhammer attacks
- latency analysis
- (figure 2 and 3 summarize very well Blockhammer)

# Weaknesses

- AT could be bypassed by multi-threads attacks
- (Section 5 is confusing; needs rephrasing or illustration)

==+== E. Comments for PC
==-== Hidden from authors.

==+== Scratchpad (for unsaved private notes)

BLockHammer

Rowhammer, bit flipping to escalate privilege nd leak private data
Rowhammer mitigations require CRAM chip phyical circuit layout OR modification to the DRAM chip design

blockhammer low cost mitiation mechanism to prevent all rowhammer bitflips

1) track row activation rates using are efficient bloom filters 
2) use tracking data to ensure no row is ever activated rapidly enough toinduce rowhammer

four level approach
1)inreased refresh rate
2) physicial isolation
3) reactive refresh
4) proactive throttling

challenge 1: efficient scaling as rowhammer worsens
challenge 2) compatibility with commodity DRAM chips

BH provides better performace and energy (avg max of 45% and 34%)

1)false-negative-free variant of counting bloom filters that eliminates the need for per-row couners
rowblocker blacklists the row until the end of the time interval

attackthrottler  reduces the memory bandwith consumed by an atacked by reducing the mem bandwith consumed by an attacker, therebey allowing concurrently 

---benign VS attacker, distinction?

attackthrotller expose the rate at which trhead activates a blacklisted row to the OS for better scheduling

ROwhammer likelihood inde

blockhammer is implemented in the memroy controller

--acctivation rate
--rowblocker delay??

Unified bloom filter -> two bloom filter with one reseted every epoch
Counting bloom filter -> returns the smallest numbe in a BF elements

combines both unified bloom filte r and counting bloom filter for blacklisting

-min of 2 epochs

Rowblocker HB is a circular queue that store row ID, timestampand  valid bit.

Tnuning for different DRAM standards


ATTACKTHROTTLER
-> identify and throttle threads that potentially induce a rowhammer attack

a thread that attemtps to issue more activations to a blacklisted row is flagged as an intrusive thread

applies  quota to the total nuber of in flight emroy requests allowed for an thread identifeid to be apotential attacker


rowhammer likelihood idex (RHLI)
<thread, DRAM bank pair>
trackers the number of blacklisted row activations the thread performs to the DRAM bank

---muli thread mitigations for attackthrottler???


+++ many-sided rowhammer attacks
---to take into account Nrh you need to increase the counter granularity (to count for sub 1 activations), this was not mentioned?

when RhI exceeds 1, attack throttler blocks  athreads memroy accesses to a bank

observe only and full functinal
observe nly show close to 0 RHLI for benign and 10 for Rowhammer inducing ones

OS-level mechanisms using RHLI for future work

SECURITY ANALYSIS


HARDWARE COMPEXITY ANALYSIS
performed with two rowhammer threshold, 32k and 1k

latency analysis -> 0.97 ns, two order of magnitude smaller than the row access latency (50ns)

scalability
blockhammer is highly scalable as Nrh decreases

worst case latency observed is at least two orders of magnitude smaller thn typical QoS
==+== End Review
