==+== Computer Architecture Paper Review Form
==-== DO NOT CHANGE LINES THAT START WITH "==+==" UNLESS DIRECTED!
==-== For further guidance, or to upload this file when you are done, go to:
==-== https://safari.ethz.ch/review/architecture21/offline

==+== =====================================================================
==+== Begin Review
==+== Reviewer: Guillaume Thivolet <gthivolet@student.ethz.ch>

==+== Paper Number

88

==+== Review Readiness
==-== Enter "Ready" if the review is ready for others to see:

()

==+== A. Overall merit
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. Reject
==-==    2. Weak reject
==-==    3. Weak accept
==-==    4. Accept
==-==    5. Strong accept
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

3

==+== B. Reviewer expertise
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. No familiarity
==-==    2. Some familiarity
==-==    3. Knowledgeable
==-==    4. Expert
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

1

==+== C. Paper summary

On-chip networks in todays' dies usually bound caches-to-caches or processor-to-cache for inter-communication. They represent approximately 30% of the power consumption: the performance/power ratio is a recurring issue in todays' designs. However, those networks tend to be on the lower-intensive spectrum edge in terms of usage. Can this property be exploited for less-energy consuming on-chip networks?

This paper introduces bufferless routing, saving (1) energy, (2) simplifying design and (3) providing similar performances to previously existing networks with buffer routing. The concept is simple: each router has the same number of inputs/outputs and the flits will constantly be on the move and never halted at any router.

The advantages are numerous: a simpler flow control, design area reduction, router latency reduction. Nevertheless, those are counterbalanced as it prevents different classes of traffics, can add latency to packets transmission (unpredictable), and also increases the buffer size on the receiver end. Overall, the performance degradation is less than 3% but there's up to 40% of saved. 

Future research in this bufferless direction will lead to more optimal algorithms that could substantially improve the results compared to this baseline. This paper is a solid groundwork for further improvements.

==+== D. Comments for author

You have thought a lot about the implications of removing the router buffers and how WORM should be adapted (ie. passing flits header next flits). Under the evaluation there could be a sub-section dedicated to the optimal size of receiving buffer. The synthetic traces validate the whole work that has been achieved in the paper and the baseline comparison were wisely chosen.

There is an assumption that all memory requests are hits which is the worst case scenario. Could adding delays to serve the memory requests remove some predictability in the network  it bandwidth intensive? The Matlab example doesn't seem very convincing as it highly depend on the memory pattern. More exploration on the cache-to-cache stress impact of memory latency is needed.

This might be because I am lacking knowledge in the field, but there is no background section which sometimes makes the decision process and the solutions harder to comprehend. A few examples where this could have proved useful: relation between packet and flits, flits header implication, link traversal, switch traversal, virtual channels..

Additional comments:

- 6.3 first paragraph, is it Vdd = 1.0 V, or each router is at VDD?

# Strength

- simple yet effective!
- Almost negligible performance degradation
- Room for exploration in bufferless algorithms

# Weaknesses

- No simulation of parallel applications
- Increased buffer size on the receiving end (not modeled?)
- Lacks a background section

==+== E. Comments for PC
==-== Hidden from authors.

==+== Scratchpad (for unsaved private notes)
A Case for Bufferless Routing in On-Chip Networks

eliminating routing or flowcontrol in chip interconnect
reducs sign. the energz consumption
prodivdes similar performances

up to 40% power

input buffer occupz 75% of the on/chip network area
eliminate uffers in the desin of on/chi cache/to/cache and cache/to/memroz netowkr

bufferless routing is to alwazs output a packet wheter or not that reuslts in the smallest path
routed to anz portevalue practical buffreless routing algorithms and comare them against baseline buffered algo
--- only work with low cache miss rate?

reomving bffer is a reduction of the total available bandwitdhth in the network

1)energy reduction?
2) gap between BLESS saturation throughput and buffer satur. througp.
3)realistic situation in which an interconnection netwok is operated ata traffic injection ratebelow bless?
4) any benefts to removing buffers?

FLIT-BLESS
each flit of a packet is routed independently of every other flit through the network
flits for a same packets may take different path (traditionnaly, they would be stored in buffers)

network topology needs to satisfy: 
-eevery router has same nb of output ports as input ports (OP and IP)
-every router is reachable from every other router

assume mesh topology

injection policyat least one free output port
arabitration policy decides which incoming flit is routed to which output port
ranking component and a port selection component
arbiration policy is rank based
ranking of output port  is determined by its desirability for this flit

five different ranking policies have been evaluated

oldest first (OF) ranking ensure the oldest flit will be always delivered to its destination

WORM BLESS
flit-level switchng in flit bless has three disadvantages (not energy optimal, negative impact on packet latency)

additionnal head wire
packet is delayedby any late flits

worm bless is an optimization to flit bless 

only the first flit of each packet should ontain header information
subequent flits should simply follow he preceding flit

worm truncation
-> each router maintains an allocation of worms to output ports
once the head flit of a packet is routed to a specific output port, this port is allocadted to this worm until the tail flit of the wrom passe the output pport.

-> small table in the router that contains informationon which output port is aallocated to which worm

injection policy: worm in injected when not all IP are busy
a worm can be truncated when new rosm arrive on all 4 input ports
the second part of the worm is injected by its first flit becoemes a head flit

prioritiyation: to avoid livelocks

WORM blss save energy compared to FLIT bless bcause of the reductionoof header flits

BLESS WITH VUFFERS
not using any buffers has little impact on performance of real applications, and adding buffers to blesscan have benefits: it increasesthroughput and decreases latency for high injection rates
buffers reduce the probability of misrouting

REDUCTION OF ROUTER LATENCY
baseline router has a 3 stage pipeline: 1)buffer write and for head flit route computation
2)virtual channel allocation and switch allocation
3) ??

--- background about flits? link traversal ?


--eliminating virtual channels prevent difeerent classes of trfic 


ADVANTAGES
purely local and sipmple flow control
simplicity and router latency reduction
area saving
absence of deadlocks and livelock
adaptivitiy
congested areas packets will be deflected ayay from local hotspots

DISADVANTEGES
increased latency (cause the deflection will take a longer path)
increased buffereing at the receiver (flits of a paket  can arrive out of order and not in time)

interesting that flit bless tends to acheieve better performance than worm bless

injection rate are considered low

--- no simulation of parallel applications
-- 6.3 1.0 Vdd. 

does memroy hit necessarly reduce stress on the chip cache to cache network

very small performance degradation (less than 3%)

BLESS reduces network enegy considerably

buffer energy not defined
==+== End Review
