==+== Computer Architecture Paper Review Form
==-== DO NOT CHANGE LINES THAT START WITH "==+==" UNLESS DIRECTED!
==-== For further guidance, or to upload this file when you are done, go to:
==-== https://safari.ethz.ch/review/architecture21/offline

==+== =====================================================================
==+== Begin Review
==+== Reviewer: Guillaume Thivolet <gthivolet@student.ethz.ch>

==+== Paper Number

97

==+== Review Readiness
==-== Enter "Ready" if the review is ready for others to see:

()

==+== A. Overall merit
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. Reject
==-==    2. Weak reject
==-==    3. Weak accept
==-==    4. Accept
==-==    5. Strong accept
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

4

==+== B. Reviewer expertise
==-== Choices:
==-==    1. No familiarity
==-==    2. Some familiarity
==-==    3. Knowledgeable
==-==    4. Expert
==-== Enter the number of your choice:

2

==+== C. Paper summary

Multiprocessor systems are designed around low-cost microprocessors and share memories for the purpose. In a classical configuration, each processor is accompanied by its memory module. A network is in charge of interlinking every processor to any memory to allow for sharing. However, the cost of those networks exceed those of the multiprocessing system in itself. Such networks are especially tough to design when dealing with the general case of random memory accesses.

A delta networks is a simple cost-efficient synchronous network, that  approaches crossbar networks in terms of performances. It divides the interconnection into multiple stages that each route wires to different modules (demultiplexers), ultimately resulting in each end node being reachable by any processor.

The implementation and evaluation has been explored methodically under the same assumptions for both, and it results that the delta-2 network is competitive after a crossover point of network size 16.


==+== D. Comments for author

In the timeline in which the paper was published, it is a valuable asset to the network interconnect community. Overall this is a pleasant read that balances the probabilistic approach to the real-system design and the conclusion reached shows that delta-networks are useful for certain system configurations.

All the explanations were rather convenient to follow (ie. permutation deck) under the hypothesis formulated by the author, with the exception those could be invalidated in a real-system. For instance, the processor generates requests that are non-necessarily random (streaming/strided patterns), and this could lead to some memory being only vested to a single processor while degrading performance for others. Additionally, requests that are blocked are usually going to be sent again, which could lead to the same issue (congestion) mentioned right before.

A concluding table about the bandwidth reached by crossbar/delta networks and depending on b, n and N parameters would have been a more concise way than the graphs(Figure 11 to 14) to illustrate. Real numbers for the memory access time and gate delay could have been introduced for a more thorough evaluation.

I think that this arbitration method used in the paper doesn't account for request priorities and assumes an ideal random distribution of memory requests. Especially the control box that just prioritizes the R0, which could lead to R1 never being sent across a stage.

Lastly, it would have been fair to mention a possible asynchronous implementation for future work.

# Strength

- Formal probabilistic evaluation
- Simple yet almost cost-efficient alternative to crossbar networks
- Best link pattern is well explained
- Evaluation on a simple simple 2x2 case as well as a general b^n case
- Crossbar and delta evaluated under the same hypothesis (expection of gate delays)

# Weaknesses

- Unfair arbitration method
- Hypothesis rarely valid
- No asynchronous

==+== E. Comments for PC
==-== Hidden from authors.

==+== Scratchpad (for unsaved private notes)

A new class of interconnection networks for multiprocessing szstems
parallel tzpe processor 
share  single min memroz through interconnection network

time-shared bus has a very limited transfer rate
ful lcrossbar switch at the other spectrum end is the most expensive

DELTA NETWORKS
2x2 crossbar switch can connects input to any outputs (demultiplexer)

in a delta network, each module is controlled by a single digit from the destination adress
no external or global control is required
idenetity permutation at the same time is not possible

one and only one path is abailable from ane source to ay destination
2^12 permutaitons

1-by-8 demultiplexer

arbitration required for conflictinng requests by accepting some and rejecting others

it is a b^n x b^n network made up of nb^(n-1) switches, each being bxb crossbar switches

each superposition must satisfy two condtions
-> no more than b^n-1 modules may be used at any level and no mrore than n levels are created
-> each BxB module must have all its inputs connected to identically labeled outputs

large possibility of link patterns availalbe for a given delta network (is one topology better than another?)


low effectiveness for random memrpy accesses

uniqueness of a path between a source and a sdestination simplifies the control and analysis of delt networks

very clear permuation explanation

IMPLEEMNTATION OF DELTA NETWORKS

description of 2x2 modules

control box is to generate the signal X and provide arbitration 
Q request exists at an input port if he corresponding request line is 1.
all processors requiring memroy access must submit their requests at the same time bx placing a 1 on the respective request line


--snychronos implemetation is not preferable if the network has many staes (but costly)

ANALYSIS OF DELTA NETWORKS
analyzing b^nxb^^n
-> each processor generated random and independent requests and they are uniformly distriuted over all mem
->  mean request generation rate is 1 or 0
-< new requests are generated every ycle and submitted at the same time
-> requests which are blcked are ignored (to simplify analysis)

quantization of probabilitiy of acceptance of a request and the expected bandwdth of any 2^n x 2^n delta network givene a mean request generation rate ,

ANALYSIS of Full Crossbar Networks (comparision)
Figure 11. shows tht delta-2 and delta -4 become inneficient after a certain N 

a cycle for a crossbar could be smaller than a cycle for a large delta network. gate delay of delta network is higher than of crossbar. but memroy access time is considered 
==+== End Review

